--- 
title: On starting a blog 
tags: blog
layout: post-layout
date: 2014-03-04 
---

After years of thinking "I want to start a blog," I have finally typed the first
sentence that I have not `ctrl-a, backspace` 'ed immediately.  It is incredibly
difficult for me to find the perfect combination of words that I am willing to
commit, for eternity, onto the Internet.  This is much different than the
thoughts I have in my head,  or conversations I have with others.  In those, the
words themselves don't really matter.  The exact phrasings fade away with time,
and only the ideas that they impressed on my mind actually last longer than a
few hours.  But this is different.  These words will not become fuzzy, I will be
able to go back decades from now and see perfectly clear each character I typed
that one night sitting on a couch in Madison. 

I really shouldn't get caught up on that, though.  While I may look back at the
things written by my past self and find fault in them in one way or another, I
would still rather look at my past imperfections than be unable to look into my
past at all.  The ability to look back and see incremental growth over time can
only happen if one is willing to start somewhere at the bottom with room to
grow.  If I waited to share my thoughts until I felt 100% confident that they
were ready to be shared, I would never share anything.

And really, that's what this is about more than anything.  A way for me to
sharpen my thoughts into something cohesive.  Instead of leaving them in an
amorphous blob stuck in my head, I am forced to really examine them and shape
them into something that others can gain meaning from as well.  Everyone's ideas
make sense to themselves, but ideas not shared with others are meaningless.
Eventually, you will be gone, and all of your ideas will be gone with you.  It
is only through the words you write, the things you say, and the bits you flip,
that you can affect the lives of others and have some impact on this world that
lasts longer than the  chemical reactions within your body.  

The problem is that it is hard to share.  It is hard to find the confidence that
your ideas will have meaning to others.  It is so hard that it leaves people in
silence, keeping those ideas in their own heads, where they are useless.  

And it will always be hard.  But it will always get easier.  All you need to do
is start.
